
It’s easy to make any experiment or campaign look like a winner if you search far and long enough for a metric that looks favorable.

Do this consistently, and you’ll reduce the value of experimentation to rubble. It will then be used as validation for what you already wanted to do, which increases the cost of experimentation, lowers the value, and in turn, destroys the expected value of the program.

I’ve given this example a few times before, and it’s an older one, so forgive me. Buffer wrote about A/B testing and gave this example:

Version A:

Version B:

Now, without the “top tweet” pin, I couldn’t tell you which of those was the winner. There are five metrics, and some are winners one variant A and some on variant B (sample size also looks somewhat small, but that’s besides the fact).

Anyway, they somehow chose Version B, I suppose because of higher retweets and mentions. But what if Clicks was the metric that mattered?

People cherry pick metrics for two reasons:

Ignorance
Incentives

The first example is simple enough to combat. Invest in data literacy and processes that mitigate these mistakes.

The second is a matter of goals and incentives. If you have a culture of “success theater” that promotes only winning campaigns, surely you’ll start only hearing about winning campaigns. People aren’t incentives to fail or show their failures, they’re incentives to become spin doctors, messengers with only good news.

This is bad news. Create a culture where failure is expected, but you learn from it and improve based on what you learn. That’s a huge value of an experimentation program.

Who hasn’t heard someone justify a campaign that failed to bring revenue by saying something like “yeah, but it was still worth it because it raised our brand awareness / engagement / etc.”

If brand awareness was the goal up front, fine. But choosing that as a justification after the fact just obfuscates the experiment design and therefore learning.

10. Keep a Tight Grip on Experimentation at Your Company

Unfortunately, the worst thing you can do for an experimentation program is dictate it entirely from the top down.

You probably have good intentions, and in the beginning days, *someone* needs to dictate what is tested.

But people are inspired by autonomy and mastery, and when you take those two things away from them, you demotivate the team and people start going through the motions. Not only that, but you bottleneck the idea and insights flow, resulting in a narrower range of experiments.

It may be tempting as the CEO, CMO, VP, whatever, to tell your team what they should and shouldn’t test. But resist. Give some ownership and trust.

Beyond that, experimentation ideally expands beyond your own team.

Here’s the path I often see experimentation programs follow: Decentralized > Centralized > Center of Excellence

Image Source

In the decentralized model, individual teams and people start running experiments with little or no oversight, guardrails, or strategy. Someone takes a Reforge or CXL class, wants to run tests, and starts doing it.

Executives then realize the value of experimentation, so they hire or spin up a specialized team. Sometimes this is called a CRO team, sometimes a growth team, sometimes an experimentation team. They’re focused on experimentation and optimization and own all efforts. They’re solely accountable and responsible for experiments, no one else can run them.

At this stage, you eliminate many errors with experiments, but you cap the value. To become an experimentation driven organization, you need to democratize, support, and enable other teams to run experiments.

This leads to the center of excellence model, where you have a centralized specialist team of experimenters and data scientists who own and manage the tools, processes, and culture around experimentation, and they enable and educate others. They become cheerleaders for experimentation in a way. Their focus moves away from individual experiments to helping others get up and running autonomously.

When I say that CRO is an operating system, this is what I mean. To unlock the value of experiments, it can’t be bottlenecked inside one person or team’s brain. It has to be a methodology by which any team can make better decisions using data and controlled trials.

This is how the best programs in the world – Microsoft, Booking.com, Netflix, Shopify, etc. — operate.

Image Source

Conclusion

Unfortunately, there are more ways to ruin an experimentation program than there are to build and maintain one.

To build an maintain one, you need just a couple things:

Highly motivated individuals
Executive buy-in and understanding
Sufficient traffic
Sufficient budget

Have those, and the rest will fall into place.

However, an experimentation program can be derailed by seemingly subtle things, like cherry picking results, rewarding only winning tests, choosing the wrong metrics, or underinvesting in resources and infrastructure.

You may think “I’ll hire a specialist and give them Google Optimize, and that’s enough,” but it’s not. Experimentation is inherently difficult and cross-functional. It’s a garden that requires nourishing, but if you water it and care for it, it’ll be a perennially productive asset for you.

Related

The 5 Pillars You Need to Build an Experimentation Program
September 1, 2021
In "Blog"

The 10 Best A/B Testing Books for Practitioners of All Levels
December 31, 2019
In "Conversion Optimization"

The 11 Best A/B Testing Tools in 2026
December 2, 2019
In "Conversion Optimization"

Categories
Blog, Conversion Optimization
The 12 Best AI Copywriting Tools in 2025
How to Hire Freelance Writers (11 Ways to Work With The Best)
© 2025 Alex Birkett • Built with GeneratePress