– David Mannheim

You can provide as much information about the reported experiment as possible. And do so in various formats. That’s why you need screenshots, video recordings, and a story to give context to all the numbers.

Remember to keep it relevant, concise, and scannable.

Tag Your Tests to Maximize Learnings

Tagging your tests keeps everything easy to reach.

It also helps you understand the purpose of a test at a glance.

If your repository is growing consistently, one day, you’ll have thousands of tests recorded and hundreds of people using it to swipe ideas, extract insights, and inform decisions.

The learnings will be more useful if people can get a sense of the position of each test in your organization’s solution spectrum.

How to Communicate Your Learnings for Maximum Effect

Your learning repository is only going to benefit your experimentation program when people actually use it.

So, besides making it accessible, present it to the rest of your team and organization in a way that makes sense and sparks interest in experimentation.

But how do you do that? These are numbers and some industry-specific terms that could be misunderstood. How do you get people from across various disciplines to appreciate the learnings you’ve gathered?

Communicating A/B tests can be tricky, but if you follow these steps you’ll knock down those barriers and get the most out of your learning repository.

Make It a Habit

First off, if experimentation is a foreign concept where you are, making a habit out of going through learnings may take some time. So, pack some patience with you on this journey.

Your assignment here is to make this part of your usual weekly activities. It could be part of the inspiration part of brainstorming or a game you play to close meetings. For instance, your own version of “what test won?”

It’s part of the grand picture of building a culture where experimenting is a norm…

Make it a habit to run through learnings with the team in a consistent, fun and inspiring way. It needs to be part of the business as usual. At least once a week there should be a meeting to go through hypotheses and experiment results. Every sprint should contain at least 1 or 2 experiments and making experimentation a habit creates a positive culture.

– Matthias Mandiau

Besides featuring it in team meetings, repository tests are also very easy to share in learnings newsletters. Being in the habit of adding them here makes it easier for sitewide adoption of experimentation as well.

Be Humble & Transparent to Build Trust

It may seem cool to convince people that experimentation has all the answers, but that would be misleading. Help your colleagues understand how it all works, what the numbers represent, and how much confidence you can place in a certain insight you’ve drawn.

Don’t present insights as if they come with 100% certainty. Instead show them this is one of the best ways you can make decisions, as opposed to “gut feeling” and best practices.

Doing the opposite will make them lose trust in the learning repository you’ve built and it could be abandoned to gather dust.

Here are some more tips from Speero’s Ben Labay on how to communicate results:

Don’t hide tests that lost. Instead, use that as an opportunity to show the double-sided benefit of testing.

If you got a win, you’ve gotten insight into what works. If it lost, you’ve learned what doesn’t work so you avoid making a change that hurts key metrics.

In both cases, you’ve learned about something that can be improved upon.

When you present, structure it in a story that shows the real-world application of the insights and invite stakeholders to participate in writing the story, just the way Max does:

We present the most recent learnings on a bi-weekly basis to our wider team and on a monthly basis to the wider business. We try to be as transparent as possible by presenting tests which lost as much as those that won. In addition to this, we ask for all reviewers to submit their ideas or ask any questions they have in our dedicated Slack channel. Where possible, we also look to demonstrate the benefit in actual terms in addition to the percentage uplift, this makes it more impactful to readers.

– Max Bradley

Don’t Gate Learning, Involve Everyone

Experimentation is not just for marketing, optimization, production, and/or growth teams. Being a data-driven organization means saturating the bulk of decision-making processes with insights extracted from well-done tests.

And your learning repository sits right in the middle of the whole mission.

So, get everyone on board.

Yes, people will have varying levels of experience in the field, but don’t let that hurt the program. As long as each team has someone or people with deeper experience with experimentation, you’ve got something going.

It’s also encouraging to have some people in the team who are more familiar with experimentation and some who have less experience with it. Having at least 2 or 3 people in the team who are experienced with experimentation makes a big difference.

– Matthias Mandiau

The influence spreads naturally this way.

Invest in a Fresh Pair of Eyes & Cross-Pollination of Ideas

Sometimes a different perspective will give you ideas you didn’t think about. So, don’t let your experimentation learnings rest in a bubble.

Be willing to share it with other experts in your field and see what you can learn from their feedback.

Maybe there’s something that didn’t work on one customer segment, but there’s a slightly different version of it that can work for another?

Or maybe you’ve stumbled on something that everyone is debating about and now you can join the conversation to learn more?

You’ll be thrilled by what you can discover when you involve other CRO experts. Even coaching calls can be part of your strategy to get a different point of view.

Coaching – www.goodui.org/coaching – one or two monthly calls with experimentation teams to: review test plans, provide feedback on test designs, and surface what has worked for others.
– Jakub Linowski

Make the Learning Shareable

Some people use Notion, others use Google Slides, and some CRO experts suggest using Miro boards, but the purpose is the same…

Communicating test data and insights with the rest of the team (or any other stakeholder) in order to make sure the learnings get enough reach.

When you use online tools like Notion, Google Slides, Miro, and any other one that you find appealing to your team, you make it easy to access the repository from any device, and from anywhere.

This is great for remote teams and for getting the fresh pair of eyes we talked about earlier.

It’s portable and can easily be shared. Now you’re really giving your experimentation learnings wings to make a full impact.

Use Insights to Plan Tests

One extra (but priceless) perk of keeping records of tests in a repository is upcycling.

Let’s say you run a test and it doesn’t yield anything earth-shattering. But you’ve recorded it in your learning repository.

10 or 20 tests down the line you unravel a fresh insight that sheds light on that non-earth-shattering test from months ago. Do you know what you have in your hands now?

Without a place to turn to for details on this old test, you get your insight and move on to the next thing. But now you have more information that enriches an insight you had before.

Now you can “upcycle” the old test, design a better one, and see what you find. Your experimentation program just keeps getting better and better. That’s the compounding effort we spoke about earlier.

Another thing is, you don’t have to be the one who ran the old test. The person who did is communicating with you through their entry in the learning repository.

Take Bets

This is one way to add excitement to testing. Who said it had to be boring?

When you’ve presented experimentation learnings to your team (as you now do regularly), and you’ve decided on the next thing to test, you can take bets on how it’ll turn out.

Not only are you exercising team members’ judgment on how prior tests predict the outcome of future tests, but you’re also getting a vested interest in experimentation.

This is an experience Laura Borghesi, VP of Revenue Marketing at Wellhub, shared in this video.

When you’ve made it a habit to check out the learnings on a weekly or bi-weekly basis, built trust, got everyone on board, and gotten vested interests in experiments, you’ll see your repo get more traffic. And usage.

The next question is: What do you need to build a repository?

Learning Repository Tools Breakdown & Comparison (+ A Checklist of Desirable Features to Get Started)

Now you understand how important a learning repository is to your testing program and you know how to use it to hit your testing goals.

But how can you make it even better with tools? What tools are those? Can you buy them or build your own?

That’s what we’re going to cover now:

What features your repository needs to have (and which are a bonus),
What tools or services you can use, and
How to set up a basic repository with simple tools.

So let’s break it all down…

Your learning repository tool should be able to let you:

structure your experiment data when documenting,
facilitate easy collaboration and sharing, and
give you a mile-high view of your entire experimentation program.

Anything more is a plus, depending on what matters most to you or your team.

Use these features to build your own bootstrapped version. But honestly, you don’t have to build it. You can cobble it together instead.

Get Started With Your Own Learning Repository

Now, let’s show you how you can build yours in 4 steps:

1. Use Simple Tools When Starting Out

There are some great tools out there that you can use to build a repository:

Effective Experiments
Source

Effective Experiments is a tool for documenting experiment data with additional features that help you scale your program and get access to CRO experts for training and consultation.

Its features include:

Experimentation workflows and processes
Enhanced quality of data
Experimentation program insights (so you get that mile-high view of your entire program)
Collaboration and communication tools
GrowthHackers Tool
Source

Experiments by GrowthHackers helps you build your experimentation learning center in a structured process based on the Growth Hacking methodology.

The key features you’ll find are:

A dashboard for strategy and metrics
Collaboration and communication tools
Hypothesis builder
Progress reports
Experiments status tracker

Both of these will work great for you. However, almost all of the experts that we spoke to recommended just using simple tools when starting out — especially if your budget is tight.

Why?

Because you don’t need to have a ‘perfect’ repository from day 1. Instead, you just need something that you can store tests in and use ASAP.

This will help you to start seeing results and learn from your A/B testing, but it also helps you to get buy-in and provide proof that a learning repository is an asset that can work for you before you invest cash in more expensive options.

Airtable. Quick and easy and free. Otherwise, I like Effective Experiments for bigger programs if they want a tool that bridges the different layers.

– Ben Labay