
Pros:

Easy to use.

Cons:

Does not bound the false positive rate and, therefore, does not solve the peeking problem.

The actual false positive rate depends on the sample size and number of intermittent analyses — which might be hard for experimenters to understand.

How data is delivered affects the choice of test

Most companies running online experiments have data infrastructure that supports either batch or streaming data (or both). In the context of online experimentation, batch data implies that analysis can, at most, be done each time a new batch of data is delivered. At Spotify, most data jobs are run daily, implying one analysis per day during an experiment. As the name indicates, the group sequential test is built for use with batches (groups) of data. If the number of intermittent analyses adds up to more than a few hundred, the test will no longer be a feasible option due to increasingly complex numerical integrations. Most experiments at Spotify run for a few weeks at most, and our data arrives in batches, which means that the GST is a good fit for our experimentation environment.

Streaming data, on the other hand, allows us to analyze results after each new observation. In other words, there can be as many analyses as there are observations in the sample. The AVI family of tests can be computed as soon as a new observation comes in. In fact, to utilize their full potential to find significant results, AVI tests should ideally be used with streaming data. While streaming data is favorable, they can also handle batch data by simply skipping the intermittent analyses. This will, however, inevitably make the AVI tests conservative to some extent, as most of the chances for false positive results are never considered. We come back to this point in the simulation study below.

Evaluating the efficacy of sequential tests by their false positive rates and statistical power

There are two important properties by which we assess the usefulness and effectiveness of the sequential tests:

A bounded false positive rate: The first and most important property for a sequential test is that it solves the peeking problem. That is, the false positive rate should not be above the intended rate (alpha) even in the presence of peeking.

High power/sensitivity: The second property is the power or sensitivity for a test, i.e., how often we reject the null hypothesis when it is not true. As often as possible, we want our test to identify effects when they are there and reject the null hypothesis when it is not true.

We acknowledge that these tests could be evaluated from many additional angles, for example what type of test statistics they can be used together with and what their small-sample properties are. In our experience, power and false positive rate are the most important aspects, and thus a good starting point for comparing.

Of the five tests mentioned above, all but the corrected-alpha approach (CAA) fulfill the first criterion of a bounded false positive rate. The CAA test is constructed in such a way that the overall false positive rate is strictly larger than alpha if any peeking is performed during data collection. The level of inflation depends on how often you peek and how large the total sample size is, as our results below reveal. Since it doesn’t bound the false positive rate under peeking, we don’t view CAA as a proper sequential test and will leave it out of the power comparison.

All other tests by construction bound the false positive rate to alpha or lower if used as intended but differ in power/sensitivity. However, these tests are also optimized to have sensitivity for different settings that we discuss further in the next section.

Monte Carlo simulation study

To build intuition for the important trade-offs when selecting between the sequential tests discussed above, we perform a small Monte Carlo simulation study.

To keep this post short, some of the details of the setup are left out. Please refer to the replication code for details. All data in the simulation is generated from a normal distribution with mean 1 (+ treatment effect under treatment) and variance 1. The sample size is balanced between treatment and control with 500 observations in each group. We run 100,000 replications for each combination of parameters. We use one-sided tests with the intended false positive rate (alpha) set to 5%. All statistical assumptions of all tests are fulfilled by construction without the need for large samples. For all simulations we vary the number of intermittent analyses. We conduct 14, 28, 42, or 56 evenly spaced analyses, or analyze results in a streaming fashion. The latter corresponds to 500 intermittent analyses in this case. Note that stream is not calculated for the GSTs since this is not plausible for the sample sizes typically handled in online experimentation.

We obtain bounds for the GST using the ldbounds R package, where we vary the expected sample size parameter [n]. We implement the GAVI test according to Eppo’s documentation, where we vary the numerator of the tuning parameter [rho]. The version of the mSPRT that we use follows the generalization presented by Lindon et al. (2022). We consider only the one-dimensional case and vary the tuning parameter [phi]. For CAA, we follow the procedure outlined in Statsig’s documentation.

We first focus on the false positive rate and then compare power under various settings for the tests that properly bound the false positive rate.

False positive rate

For the empirical false positive rate simulation, we consider the following tests and variants of tests:

GST

We apply the test with (1) a correctly assumed sample size, (2) a 50% underestimated sample size (i.e., we wrongly assumed a too low maximum sample size 500, but the real observed final sample size was 750), and (3) a 50% overestimated sample size (i.e., we assumed a too high sample size 500, but the real sample size was 250). When we oversample and obtain more observations than expected, we apply the correction to the bounds proposed in Wassmer and Brannath (2016), pages 78–79.

We use two versions of the so-called power family alpha spending function that are either quadratic or cubic in the information ratio. See Lan and DeMets (1983).

GAVI

We set the numerator in the tuning parameter [rho] to the correct expected sample size, and to 50% oversampled or undersampled.

mSPRT

We set the tuning parameter [phi] to 1/[tau]2 where [tau] is equal to one of the true effect sizes used in the simulation study (0.1, 0.2, or 0.3).

CAA – no settings.

Naive

The alpha used in the standard z-test is set to 0.05 divided by the number of intermittent analyses.

Results

Table 1 displays the empirical false positive results across the 100,000 Monte Carlo replications. As expected, all tests but the oversampled GST and the CAA tests successfully bound the false positive rate. For the GST this is expected since all the false positive rate is fully consumed once the sample reaches the planned sample size, and any test beyond that point will inflate the false positive rate. Similarly, the CAA test is using all intended false positive rate on the last analysis point, and all tests run before the full sample is obtained inflate the false positive rate.

It is worth noting that the always valid tests (GAVI and mSPRT) are conservative when the test is not performed after each new observation. Interestingly, the naive approach has similar conservativeness as some of the always valid approaches when 14 intermittent analyses are performed.

	

	

Number of intermittent tests

	

	

	

	




Test

	

Additional test parameter

	

14

	

28

	

42

	

56

	

stream




GST, quadratic alpha spending

	

Expected sample size per group[n]

	

	

	

	

	




	

250

	

0.07

	

0.07

	

0.07

	

0.08

	

–




	

500

	

0.05

	

0.05

	

0.05

	

0.05

	

–




	

750

	

0.03

	

0.02

	

0.03

	

0.03

	

–




GST, cubic alpha spending

	

Expected sample size per group[n]

	

	

	

	

	




	

250

	

0.07

	

0.07

	

0.07

	

0.07

	

–




	

500

	

0.05

	

0.05

	

0.05

	